Email Header Analysis Guide

Tools and Their Purpose

Sublime Text + Email Header Package (13Cubed) – Format and highlight headers for easier reading.

IANA Message Headers Registry – Official reference for header field definitions.

DomainTools WHOIS (link) – Check domain registration, ownership, and creation dates.

Microsoft Message Header Analyzer (MHA) – Analyze headers visually:
Web tool: https://mha.azurewebsites.net/
GitHub: https://github.com/microsoft/MHA

MXToolbox – Header analysis, DNS lookups, blacklist checks, DKIM/SPF/DMARC validation

DNSChecker – Verify DNS records across global servers.

MalwareCube Email IOC Extractor – Parse IPs, domains, and IOCs from headers automatically.

PhishTool - 

Threat Intelligence Sources – VirusTotal, AbuseIPDB, Cisco Talos, GreyNoise for IP/domain reputation.


Understanding Headers

Each mail server that relays an email adds a "Received" header.

The topmost entry is closest to the recipient (your mail server).

Work backwards through the chain to identify the original sender.

Compare the "X-Sender" or "X-Originating-IP" fields against the Received chain to detect spoofing.

The most important entry is the one involving your MTA (Mail Transfer Agent), as this is the most reliable point.

IP and Domain Checks

Geolocation – Identify where the IP is physically located.

ASN Lookup – Find the ISP or organization that owns the IP.

Reverse DNS – Confirm if the IP resolves to the claimed hostname.

Reputation Check – Determine if the IP or domain is blacklisted or known for abuse.

WHOIS Lookup – Review domain registration history and creation dates to spot suspicious or newly registered domains.


SPF (Sender Policy Framework)
Check if the sending IP is authorized to send mail for the domain:

nslookup -type=txt shodan.io | grep -i spf
dig TXT shodan.io | grep -i spf 

DKIM (DomainKeys Identified Mail)
Extract the domain and selector from the DKIM-Signature header.

Query DNS for the public key:
nslookup -type=txt selector._domainkey.domain.com

DMARC (Domain-based Message Authentication, Reporting & Conformance)
Check if the sending domain enforces DMARC:

dig TXT _dmarc.domain.com


Extra Checks

Compare the Return-Path with the From field.

Validate that the Message-ID domain aligns with the sender’s domain.

Watch for anomalies such as:
Private IP addresses in the Received chain.
Missing or invalid SPF, DKIM, DMARC records.
Domains registered recently or with suspicious WHOIS details.
Known malicious IPs or domains identified in reputation databases.

Automation and Enrichment

Use the MalwareCube Email IOC Extractor to quickly parse IPs, domains, and hashes.
Cross-check findings with threat intelligence platforms such as VirusTotal, Talos, AbuseIPDB, or GreyNoise.
Document results clearly for reporting and incident response.

Key Takeaways

Trace the routing path using Received headers.

Validate sender identity with SPF, DKIM, and DMARC.

Investigate IPs and domains with WHOIS, ASN, geolocation, and reputation checks.

Use your MTA entry as the point of truth. Anything before that can be spoofed.